# What everyone should know about cryptography

## Why do I need cryptography?

Let me illustrate the problem. Let's say you want to log into Facebook, so you enter your password in and send it to Facebook so they can verify your identity and log you in. However, someone on your network happens to be watching your

You might think I don't need this because I'm not a big target, who would want to try to steal my stuff?

Have you entered any of the following on the internet?

1. password or PIN to sensitive account (bank account, investing account, social network)
2. Social Security number (insurance website, registering for company account)
3. Birthdate
4. credit card number

## Why do I need to understand cryptography?

Encryption cannot protect you if you don't use it. That might seem obvious, but you might be surprised

Encryption cannot protect you if you don't understand how to use it.

// picture of lock on door that doesn't actually lock it

## Symmetric encryption

Symmetric encryption uses a *single key* to encode and decode a message.

// illustration here

In symmetric encryption, the both parties hold the same key and can use it to (1) encode and send messages to each other or (2) decode and receive messages from each other.

The advantage to a single key is that it is easy to use and easy to understand.

The disadvantage to a single key is that it is impossible to safely exchange one over a public channel. This is a *really big problem*.

In order to use symmetric encryption, both parties need to agree on a single key and keep that key secret. The easiest way to do this is for one party to decide on a key and tell the other what it is *without anyone overhearing*. You could whisper the key into the other person's ear, but that's not feasible when you're trying to communicate over a public channel like the internet.

## Asymmetric encryption

Luckily, a bunch of really smart people figured out how to exchange keys over a secure channel. The solution is asymmetric encryption.

Asymmetric encryption uses *two keys*, one to encode and one to decode.

// illustration here

Now, I can send the first key to anyone who wants to communicate with me securely. They use the first key to encode the message, and I use the second key (which I have kept private and sent to no one) to decode the message. In this case, no one except me can read the encoded message, because I have not exposed the second key.

This is why the key to encode is often called a *public key*. You can expose the encoding key to the public with confidence. Conversely, the key to decode is called a *private key*, because that key cannot be exposed to the public without compromising the security of the encryption.

## What should I do?

Always use encryption for anything you're not okay with posting on Facebook. This means using HTTPS (look for the little lock symbol in your browser) anywhere you're typing in passwords or Social Security numbers or PINs or mean notes about your colleague.
